The Realms of the Dwarves
  









Chapter Ⅰ
A Night Ambush


















When Theodreth woke up, he was falling through darkness. He looked up and saw darkness interspersed with stars shining brightly. When he looked down hours later, he saw a splotch of green growing larger alarmingly quickly. Theodreth then braced himself for a shock. Soon, the bed hit the ground with a crash. His head hit the banister then the world went black.


 When he came to, he was lying in his bed. The bed itself was on a green moss sort of carpet. As he thought, the question of how he had survived the fall presented itself to his mind. At the moment, he could not think how. First, the bed was old and made of solid oak. Secondly, the moss seemed very soft and spongy from the way it was quivering around the heavy, solid wood frame of the bed. 


 He jumped up when he heard a deep rolling voice say, “What is the meaning of this? Am I not allowed to have a walk without furniture falling on me?  I say, what are we coming to these days?” The speaker was an old, strong dwarf about Theodreth’s height with a long white beard. He was wearing a brown tunic, leather pants, and stout brown boots. 


“Who are you?” Theodreth asked. At this, the dwarf said, “I am Dwarrold of the Ironfist family.” Theodreth was about to say, “I am pleased to meet you,” when he felt hot breath on his neck. 


He started and turned as the dwarf laughed in a deep voice. “That is old grunt, the mossgrubber.”  What Theodreth saw was a small animal about the size of a Shetland pony. It had long, shaggy hair that was colored like deep loam, and it looked up from the moss it was contentedly chewing. 


The old dwarf explained, “That is a moss grubber. They will survive on the moors here in the Moss Hills. Their milk is rich, and their hair is soft and good for clothing.” [a][b][c]


Theodreth then continued, “I am Theodreth Thornhelm.” 


“My halls welcome you and my hearth greets you...”


Dwarrold paused as if looking over the hills, for they were standing on the side of a sloping hill. Theodreth looked out over the mosslands interspersed with trees and shrubs and saw several ragged dark shapes approaching. Suddenly, a younger but no less sturdy dwarf appeared over a ridge. He was clad in a tunic of sturdy green cloth. 

        He too spotted the shape and said, “Father, who has you here, and see those grim wolves are at their mischief again.”


Dwarrold told Theodreth, “We must make for the house, and swiftly, for they are after the mossgrubbers most likely. Here is my son, Dwain.” 


Suddenly, a large doglike creature bowled into Dwain, but the sturdy dwarf stood fast and grabbed his axe. The beast had a fearsome look with a shaggy coat and dark hair. It was larger than a normal wolf and ran with a strange gait. Swinging so hard he cleaved through its skull, Dwain struck at the wolf with his axe. Stooping, Dwarrold drew something from the wolf’s flank. Then they started towards the house at a run.


The house was built of sturdy stones with strong oaken boughs. It was built against a hill, and it was clear that a passage led into the earth, perhaps a storeroom or cellar. As Theodreth entered, a stone-walled room opened up. There was a blazing hearth with chairs arranged around it and an oaken table. As he had guessed, Theodreth noticed a passage leading into the hill. 


  





Dwarrold began rummaging in a chest which contained all manner of oddments. Theodreth asked Dwain, “What were those creatures?”


In a weary voice, Dwain answered, “They were grim wolves, fell beasts, and grim. They are not altogether allied with the dark dwarves, but they roam the forests and cause mischief in the forest settlements. Some, however, have been tamed and over the ages turned into evil mounts for the dark dwarves.” 


“Who are the dark dwarves?”


Looking up from the chest, Dwarrold replied, “Enemies of the high king Galadluin, of whom we guard a border outpost.”


Dwain interrupted, “We must send a report to the king. He will desire tidings.” 


“So we must, Dwain, you and Theodreth must make your way to the king's mountain.” So saying, Dwarrold returned to the chest from which he soon produced than armful of gear. “I will stay here, although I fear another long and grievous war is brewing and we shall be hard-pressed to stave it off.” With that, Dwarrold sat down on one of the chairs, which was upholstered with leather. He began sorting through old waterskins, leather bags full of yellowing maps, half-melted candles, and even a bronze bear figurine which was intracly worked. 


Arising from his seat to pace up and down in front of the hearth, Dwain asked, “Shall you be attacked here, father?”


Dwarrold answered after a short pause, “It will be a few months at least before the war begins in earnest, I deem. Moreover, the wars in the past have begun with several years of continued raids and skirmishes before we can draw the enemies into a drawn battle. In truth, the last war many centuries ago has hardly ended, for as you know, there have been raids every few years.”


“What sign of war can you perceive? Could this raid of grim wolves be merely a roving band of hungry beasts?” 


        “Did you not behold this in the wolf’s flank?” Dwarrold laid a broken and blood-stained arrow on the table. It was snapped off a hand's breadth above the wickedly barbed head, which was stained in dark blood and matted fur.  


Dwain ceased        his pacing and, with an exclamation, sat down heavily, “May the king preserve us.” 


“Could this arrow not have been shot by some shepherd defending his flock?” Theodreth asked, peering at the object.


“Nay, no shepard shoots such an arrow.” Dwarrold continued, “It could have been a single raid, boding no war, however, I deem that is not the case.”


“How so?” Dwain interrupted.


“These arrows would be shot by a dedicated band of dwarves, not a band of bedraggled goblins or orcs who raid by the will of the dark lord. See the remains of the dark lord’s crest on the arrowhead.” So saying, Dwarrold sat back in his chair with a triumphant look on his face.


“I see,” Dwain likewise sat in silence for a time. 


The silence was only broken by Theodred saying, “I perceive the danger, yet all I see there is for us to do is to travel to the king.”


“So it is.” Dwarrold and Dwain both agreed, then, slowly rising, Dwain went to the mantelpiece. From there, he took down a horn. It was carved and darkened with gold inlays. But Dwarrold said, “Nay, do not take the horn yet. I might require it here, and moreover, a time of great trial has not arrived.


“Yes, Father, I see.” Dwain now turned to the pile of oddments and withdrew a dagger, which he thrust into his belt. For his part, Theodrith was slightly flustered by the quick conversation between father and son. He was also confused about the horn but held his tongue. 


Dwain was bustling around gathering food and supplies while Dwarrold was continuing his instructions, “You must travel swiftly and silently. The road is long but not overly so. Take only the most necessary provisions so as not to slow down your traveling. Ah, here it is.”


        With this last remark, Dwarrold lifted a fairly whole waterskin and a pack. The pack was rent and patched with varying shades of leather. Yet it looked whole enough. Dwarrold handed Theodreth the waterskin, a stave, and pack. Dwain then took up a pack and a staff. After he opened the door, Dwarrold bid them farewell and turned into the house. Theodreth and Dwain walked steadily out and onward. 


        The grim wolves had vanished, and they made good progress.  The moss gradually changed to a thicker, more springy variety. The sun was overhead as they sat by a small stream to eat a strip of dried meat that was very hard to chew, and Dwain explained that it was “moss grubber meat” and a hunk of hard bread.  They filled their flasks at a stream which wound its way across their path.  


There were many trees, some of which were of awesome proportions, the majority of which were oaks and beeches. One tree in particular caught his eye. It was stony gray and bore a large brown nut. Dwain explained that these were Stone Oak and that the nuts, although inedible, could be boiled for a long time until they formed a broth.


 At first, the ground was flat and wooded. Then, after a few hours, it changed to a rolling moor. After a while, they came to a more hilly portion of the moor. 


        The afternoon passed uneventfully. Except for Theodreth finding a black gem. Dwain said, “This is a common find on the edges of the kingdom. It is said among loremasters that they were made by the dark lord Kar-Galthor in a great war.” 


They did not light a fire that night and slept under the starless night. The ground was covered in a green moss that was interspersed with a darker shade of moss that grew berries close to the ground. The moss was light, and sprang back readily when stepped on.


        It was on the third day that the mist came as a rolling, thick wall. Dark and foreboding, it loomed up behind them, in front of them, and to either side.  As Dwain muttered and grumbled, the mist thickened until it was impossible to travel. Theodreth asked Dwain in a hushed voice, “Are these lands always covered in such a fog?” 


Dwain replied with a grunt. Then, after a pause, he answered, “Sometimes.” With a sigh, he continued, “It is often misty, but not like this.” He said no more, and they plodded along in silence for a time. 


        The misty dark closed in around them as he settled in for a night’s rest. At nearly midnight, there was a howl in the distance, then another and another, gradually growing closer and closer.  Dwain leaped up and whispered urgently, “Get moving.” The rolling walls of thick white mist closed in once more.    


In a few strides, they came to a dry stream bed. Its bottom was covered in fist-sized rocks. The stones near the banks had a thin layer of moss creeping over them. 


        Dwain said, “We can do no worse than to keep to this watercourse. Methinks I know a cave nearby in which we may shelter hidden.”
        
Theodreth replied, “Let us find it soon, for I feel as if those howls are from some fell beast and not that of a wolf, is it not. 


Dwain answered, “They are not, for the wolves that dwell in the great woods do not venture so far from their fastnesses. 


As they hurried along the dry stream bed, the howls grew nearer and nearer. When they were aside a tall dead stump which loomed gloomily over their heads, they stopped. “I must get a breath of air,” theodreth said.


 Suddenly, a wolf-like creature the size of a pony burst from the wispy mist in front of them. On top of it sat a dwarf who was clearly the leader. He had a short brown beard and a black iron helm. Theodreth heard another behind him, and soon they were surrounded by half a score of wolf-like beasts. They had dark dwarves riding on their backs. 


The dwarves were grim-looking and almost all carried spears. They mostly were clad in darkly wrought mail. Theodreth saw an embossed design on their armor. There was a black dragon rearing above grey mountains set in a red field. Some of the dark dwarves also carried an emblem of a great, brown bird over a fell forest on a brown field. Their leader was one of these


Dwain brandished his axe and declared, “We are peaceful travelers who may ye be to come in war to the king’s lands.” 
The leader of the raiding party responded, “Who may ye be who stand in the way of Gren-Thandorg, Lord of the Grimweald. As to my rights, we shall soon see whose lands these are.” 
“You servant of the dark, stay your advance.” Dwain was blustering yet slowly inching to one side. Theodreth fingered the carved head of his walking stave helplessly. Suddenly, Dwain nudged Theodreth, and looking up, he understood. As Dwain stood as if in though Theodreth stepped aside. 


Gren-Thandorg, who was suddenly suspicious, urged his steed forward. Then Dwain leapt. He landed aside the fell beast and smote it in the flank with his axe. With a blood-chilling cry it fell, pinning its rider beneath it. Theodreth then smote a tall, dead stump with his staff. It exploded in a cloud of wood dust. Small insects scuttled away as clumps of dry, brittle wood flew everywhere. 


With this distraction, the two raced away over fog-covered moorland. The sounds of pursuit were getting louder when all of a sudden the moss gave way under their feet and for the second time in four days, Theodreth felt himself falling.
















































































Chapter Ⅱ 
Tal-Tormind
                                             










Theodreth plummeted down for a moment and then struck a hard stone. After hearing the sounds of the wolves above him get nearer, then lessen and disappear, he sat up. Then Theodreth remembered the captain of the wolf riders and shrank back.


His thoughts were interrupted by Dwain saying, “What luck to stumble upon the cave so soon. Well, let's rest. Then we shall continue on our journey.” 


As Dwain cleared the entrance, which was covered in heather and drooping moss, Theodreth saw the rocky walls of the cave in more detail. They were of a rough gray stone, which was covered in some places with blue-gray lichens. 


Theodreth suddenly cried out, “What’s this?” He held up a gray stone which seemed to glow with a faint inner light.


“Truly, I do not know,” said Dwain. “I have never heard of the like except in the works of the great gem-wrights.”


Theodreth tucked the stone into a pocket in his pack, which was a rather old one that Dwarrold had hastily given Theodreth on their parting.
 
Soon, they were off. The mist had mostly cleared, and in the distance, there loomed ever drawing nearer the great spire of Tal-Tormind. As they walked, Theodreth examined the ground, which was growing rocky and sparsely covered with a darker-hued moss. The Ground was littered with great stones, weathered and covered with clinging lichen. They rose in great weathered spires twisting above the plain, which was still covered in wisps of mist that clung to hollows and hills. 


Occasionally, Dwain called a halt at one of these gray boulders. Then they opened their packs and ate a hurried meal of thick bread, tough meat, and cheese. Their journey continued, and during the last few days, Dwain insisted on marching on through the nights with only a slight halt. When they did sleep, they did so in the shade of one of the rocks. No fire was lit, and Theodreth, who was thoroughly sore, slept little. At noon on the seventh day from their setting out, they arrived at the gates.


        Tal-Tormind was a great horn of rock, from which it got its name which means great mountain. The spire’s southern side had been hewn into the likeness of two great dwarves bearing the mountain's weight on its shoulders. The only gate was of stone and iron and mithril. The other slopes had watch towers and battlements hewn into the living rock, but that side was largely unscalable. Around it stretched a plain with great rocks jutting out and scattered all over the field.   


        On the spire’s top, a flat place was set under the peak that was open, facing the south. Upon it was set a great horn which was made of the horn of a great wyrm that the present king’s ancestor Tharkond the Great had slain. This horn was used as a signal and a battle challenge. Only twice before had it been blown as a battle challenge. Once, a host of orcs threatened the kingdom in the distant past, and second, before the crushing defeat of the Dark Lord’s armies a few thousand years before.


        A few hours later, they came up to the gate as Theodreth and Dwain came nigh to the colossal gates. 


They were heralded by a cry, “Who goes there?” 


Dwain muttered, “The king has heard some ill tidings that the gate is shut before the usual hour of closing.” 


Then he replied, “Dwain son of Dwarrold, border warden of the west marches.”  


The watchman called as the gates opened, “Make haste, the king, foreseeing your arrival, has ordered you to be brought before him.” 


        Dwain and Theodreth passed through the gates and into the city. The buildings, or rather caverns, were hewn from the solid rock. Some were devoted to the city's defense and closer to ground level at the mountain's base. However, platforms and caves open to the air with ballistae and catapults were scattered on the higher levels. The dwellings of the dwarves were carved into the middle of the mountain. 


On the west side of the city was carved a vast network of interconnecting platforms. This was the great market square of Tal-Tormind. Here, the artisans and craftsmen sold their wares. Here, the farmers from the countryside came to sell their produce.


On the highest levels lay the great library, the forges, and the king's palace. Although the mountain held hundreds of thousands of caverns, all carved out, for there were no natural ones. The mountain was by no means weak or hollow and was as strong as the solid stone of which it was mostly composed.  


Up staircases hewn from the face of the rock, they climbed until finally they reached the head of the stone warriors about three-quarters of the way up. They entered a wide hall facing the south, from which a stream of water plummeted down to the plain below. There, it flowed south into the river Sign-nalla, which was seen in the distance. The walls were covered in tapestries depicting the lords of old. At the far end of the hall on a throne of stone sat the old king Galadluin, high king of the dwarves. 


Lords of the council surrounded him. 


When Theodreth and Dwain entered, he looked up and cried, “Come Dwain, we need your counsel sorely. But who have you here?”


Dwain  replied, "A young dwarf Theodreth  who wishes to help in the war for war I feel there must be.” 


The king replied, “Very well. He shall be the companion of my dear friend and counselor Frathorin’s son, Eòghan.” He motioned to a young dwarf who had been standing back. “Come here, Eòghan. Take Theodreth here to Gathorsithoran (which means great library or records). We have important business to discuss.” Turning to a richly clothed dwarf standing beside him, he said, “Ardwyad, bestow a bag of gold coins upon Theodreth here.” And with that, the king turned to Dwain.


After receiving the coins, Eòghan took Theodreth through a passage and to the Great Library Gathorsithoran. This cavern was a maze of records and books dotted here and there with desks and benches. The shelves were in no organization, for just scanning a quarter of the titles would be a life’s work for several dwarves. The young dwarves wandered along in silence until Theodreth asked, “What is it of this war?” 


Eòghan replied, “Since the rebellion three thousand years ago, there has been constant war, sometimes languishing, sometimes flaring up. But after the crushing defeat we gave them forty years ago when my father was but a hundred and twenty, we had hoped they would be crushed forever.”


“Some four days ago, we heard that the inhabitants of the last southern outpost and all the other southern settlements were slain and that a great host of dark dwarves is marching upon the city itself.” 
         
   “What are our weaknesses?” asked Theodreth 


 “Magic,” Eòghan replied promptly. “Magic and numbers. We have more dwarves than them if they can still be called dwarves,” Eòghan said bitterly, “But they can throw tens of thousands of orcs who must be owned as doughty fighters, however twisted and debased they may be.” 


Theodreth asked eagerly, “And of Magic?” 


Eòghan answered, “We are skilled in working enchantments into weapons and metals.” “But their leaders can weave magic so that the air trembles.” 


“I would know more of such matters,” Theodreth  eagerly said, “I long to see skilled works of forgecraft.” 


“I say, what is this?” So saying, he pulled a large tome from the shelf beside him. It was faded green and had equally faded runes on its cover. The runes read “The Book of Gill-Aldair, King's Man, and Adventurer, translated and recorded by Eirwyn-Crisdain, loremaster of Tal-Tormind. 


        “I have never seen such,” Eòghan replied. “The runes are written with a strange twist, and besides, are of an older style than we are wont to use. Let us repair to the Book-Masters and see if they have lore concerning Gill-Aldair or Eirwyn-Crisdain.”


        The Book-Masters did, in fact, know about Eirwyn-Crisdain, who was the loremaster of Tal-Tormind four thousand years ago. He had translated many records and old books from old llafar, the ancient tongue of the Northmen. The Book-Masters knew not of Gill-Aldair. One of the Book-Masters, Taliesin, led them to a more organized portion of Eirwyn-Crisdain’s books. Here, since a copy of the book was found, Theodreth’s offer of two golden coins was readily accepted. 


After walking through several levels of the library, they wandered to the entrance where they met Dwain looking for them.


As he led them away, he explained, “The king has taken counsel, and all agree that war is imminent. He desires you, Eòghan, to be a companion to Theodreth.”


        Eòghan interrupted, “I will gladly do so, but what of the war?”


        Dwain replied, “Theodreth and you must be thoroughly fitted out in attire suitable for all the hardships of a tiresome journey. You must have stout armor but light. Your father, Eòghan, desired me to give you this.” So saying, he produced a bag of coins and handed it to Eòghan.” 


Dwain continued, “Theodreth, your purse, which I deem rich, will be suitable for your wants. The king bade me say that he deems you a promising young dwarf, and he promises you said if you are ever in great want.” 




Eòghan led Theodreth towards the market. The market was a complex of caves and platforms carved out of the rock with pathways and courtyards in between. The beginning of the market was not far from the palace, and Theodreth and Eòghan quickly arrived at the first stalls. 


As Theodreth and Eòghan strode along the pathway, they saw the sheer wall, pocketed with booths and stalls, rising above their heads. To the other side was a courtyard surrounded by a low wall with the cliff plummeting down to the next level of the market. Where there were no stalls, the walls were covered in carvings of ancient tales and scenes or designs of immense age and dignity engraved into the hard stone. 


The upper levels of the market were devoted mainly to forgecraft and leatherwork. The lower levels being filled with produce from the villages. The stalls around them were lined with wonderful works of forgecraft. There were knives, axes, pickaxes, and other tools. The weapon smith’s and armorer's stalls lay further on.


In one booth occupied by a dwarf with an apron full of awls and hammers, there was a selection of packs and knapsacks. Some of these were filled with the odds and ends of equipment that are often forgotten on adventures and journeys[d][e][f]. The dwarf had a red beard and was wearing, in addition to the apron, trousers with sturdy boots and a tunic with a hood cast back over his shoulders.


Seeing Theodreth examining the knapsacks, the leathersmith said, “Aye, these will suffice for any need ye may come across. They are worked from the hides of the northern cattle and will not readily tear or rip. I warrant.”


        Theodreth found on opening the pack that it contained a coil of rope, a bundle of leather lashings, fishing hooks, a spoon and fork, a tinderbox, and other supplies. The pack’s outside was a russet brown hue with several pouches. In one of these was a small knife and sheath. Emblazoned on the pack’s back was the seal of the Mountain, a spire rising over moorland with a stream flowing out from it. 


        Theodreth asked, “How much is the knapsack here?”


        “Eight golden Realms,” The leathersmith answered.
        
        Although bartering for goods was the custom with many of the smaller establishments, the prices set by the more skilled or frequented artisans’ booths were seldom haggled over. Thus, when Theodreth produced the golden Realm, he donned the pack without further time spent in bargaining. 


        On leaving the leathersmith’s stall, Eòghan said, “Let us purchase a waterskin for I need one also.”


        Theodreth found the waterskins, and they were purchased for seven Silver Trees each. They were of stout leather but worked skillfully to preserve a quantity of fresh water. They were of the same hue of leather as the knapsacks. 


Leaving the trader who sold waterskins, Theodreth and Eòghan walked toward the nearby toolsmith’s who had rows of axes and knives lining his booth.


“What do ye need?” The smith cried out, “Here is the finest tool-iron forged in this mountain.” 


Eòghan replied, “We are seeking two axes and two long knives such as may stand up to battering and long use without shattering and giving way when most needed.”
 
        In answer, the smith said, “Aye, I know of the blades of which ye speak, but Tal-Gofaint do nae forge such blades.” 
        
        Theodreth picked up a dagger and pulled it out of its sheath, which was of brown leather. It had a good stout blade made of a dark gray iron, but was sharp and cunningly worked with a pattern of leaves climbing up the blade. 


        After examining the blades, Eòghan replied to Tal-Gofaint, “Aye, those are fine blades. How much do ye charge for them?”


        “A Golden Realm for the pair,” 


        “A steep price but fair, I deem,” Eòghan said. “Here are the coins.” 


        So saying, he handed over the Silver Trees, which were silver coins with a tree and a bow emblazoned on them.


        As Tal-Gofaint gave Theodreth the daggers, he said, “I warrant ye will nae find any such blade in this or any other market.”


        Theodreth and Eòghan now made their way along a walled pathway and up a set of stairs until they came to the weapon smith’s stalls. They wandered around the booths, which were mostly set into the wall, looking into a series of walled courtyards that looked out and down onto the lower levels of the mountain. The booths were lined with all manner of daggers, swords, axes, spears, pikes, and innumerable other weapons. 


        Eòghan stopped at one stall, which was cut into the mountainside and was hung with many swords. The occupant was an old dwarf, who stood up and laid aside a dagger he had been polishing, as they strode in. His hands were rough with at least  a century of work at the forge. He was clad in a brown tunic with a leather apron and dark brown trousers.


“Good afternoon, young masters. Do ye seek sturdy, trustworthy blades?” The dwarf greeted them.


Theodreth replied, “Indeed, I am seeking such a blade that will serve me for daring journeys and dire battles with fell foes. 


“I, old Haern the smith, have the very blade you need.” Haern, saying this, beckoned for them to follow and disappeared into the depths of his booth. “My father owned this stall and his father before him, and when I inherited it, I found this hidden in a corner.” So saying he withdrew a bundle from a pile of old leather sword belts and sheaths. 


Haern took the bundle, which was of thick cloth, to a table in the light. As he unrolled the bundle he spoke to Theodreth, “I know not how my grandfather came to possess this sword but it is a mighty blade indeed.” 


The cloth fell away and revealed a sheath containing a fairly long blade of a grey-blue iron, which was polished and sharp despite centuries of gathering dust in a corner. The blade was bare except for a groove down the middle, which seemed as if it was more deeply blue than the other parts of the blade. The hilt was of simple leather with a polished dark green stone set at the pommel. Not a jewel but a polished stone of the forest mountains. The sheath was simple but emblazoned with the same seal of the mountain that was on Theodreth’s pack. 


Eòghan gasped. “That is a mighty sword.”


Haern replied. “Aye, it is wrought of white-iron and will not blunt even if struck against iron or stone. I would ask no less than fifteen Golden Realms for the blade.” 


Theodreth readily agreed to the price set forth and speedily produced the coins. Haern handed Theodreth the sword and sheath. Then they returned to the sunlit outer booth. 


There Haern bade farewell to Theodreth and Eòghan, saying, “That blade will serve ye well. It was forged by a master smith, that I can tell. I bid thee farewell.”


Calling their thanks to the old smith, Theodreth and Eòghan strode out of the courtyard and onto a path. On leaving the sheltered courtyard, they noticed a chill wind from the west which flowed along the path and rustled among the stalls. Theodreth bought a dark green cloak. Eòghan threw on his cloak, which was dark blue and had been stuffed in his pack.


  



They walked down to the stalls selling foodstuffs and bought a good supply of various foods. Theodreth had a great quantity of dried meat and cheese, a number of cloth pouches containing dried fruits or mushrooms, and bundles of dried roots such as carrots. 


Eòghan purchased a pouch of healing plants and bandages. This he stowed away in his pack. They then returned to the upper levels and found a seat facing west and over the market. 


Here, Theodreth laid out the book of Gill-Aldair and “Let us examine this tome, which I deem might be of use, seeing that it is a book of travel.” The first page was of no consequence and described how Gill-Aldair had set out from a village called Greenwood in the Emerald Glens. Theodreth then turned a few pages where there was a page interspersed with sketches. 




        Eòghan remarked, “Those are like plants I have seen on a journey to the Emerald Glens. But yet they are unlike any i have seen” 


The following pages describe a set of ruins hidden in an ancient glen.


Theodreth said, “Apparently, these ruins and this glen held some importance to Gill-Aldair.” 


Suddenly, Eòghan exclaimed, “Here, there is a note under the sketch of that long trailing plant.”


There was indeed a note and it read thus, “These plants seem to exhibit cycles of fruiting that are rare in their kinds outside of this and a few other vales, all of which contain the remains of ancient dwellings and hallows. The plant’s fruit is more unto the gems of the hills and the jewels of the mountains than to the fair fruit of the known valleys.” 


“Well,” Eòghan interrupted, “but why do these plants grow only by ancient stones and ruins?”
After looking through three more pages of sketches and notes, Theodreth found another mention of the ruins.


“The ancient dwelling which the dwarves of old built in the Emerald Glens which these particular plants mature around are often merely piles of stone. The tales told in the villages, such as Greenwood, state that some of the ancient dwarves dwelt in the vales after the last great battle of the Lords. They were fresh from the guiding teachings of the Wise-Ones. Their dwellings were more suitable for the growing of plants to fufilment of their purpose. In their hallowed grounds where they offered up thanks and praise, these plants flourished. In all my journeys, most of the gems of the sort that appear to be matured and hardened fruit have been found in the hollowed glades.”


Theodreth took a deep breath and reached into his pocket for the stone he had found in the cave. All of a sudden, the trumpets at the gates burst into a heralding blast. Eòghan and Theodreth then hastily picked up the book and hastened to the most southerly edge of the market where they could see the gate. Along the way, they brushed past many who were bustling in the same direction. 


  





At last, they found a battlemented terrace where there were no stalls; here they stopped. There, Theodreth and Eòghan saw a line of warriors dressed in light mail and leather armor marching in. They carried a banner emblazoned with an eagle over a mountain pass. 


Thoughtfully, Eòghan said, “Those are the mountaineers of the lord Caerlion, the lord of the mountaineers. They are few but a hardy folk who dwell in the northwest mountains. Their lord must have been summoned to the king’s council, for there are only tenscore at most. Still, I wonder those are a great many warriors for a council.” 


Theodreth exclaimed, “Look at that group of dwarves with the green banner.”


        “Those are the folk of lord Dughlas, the lord of the northern dwarves.” Eòghan continued. “I wish we knew what was going on.” 


They leaned against the battlement for some time, watching the groups of warriors ride up. Each was bearing a banner with the ensignia of the lord or chief who was riding at their head. 
        Theodreth then said, “Well, let us to the king’s halls. There we shall find Dwain and can have our supper.” 


        So saying, they proceeded to the quarters assigned to Dwain. After wandering through halls and passages with engravings on their walls, they found him on a bench outside of his room, sharpening his axe.


He grunted when they arrived and continued sharpening his axe. 


Theodreth asked, “Why were many of the lords of the kingdoms mustered? Shall we ride to war?”


Dwain slowly replied, “There was a council called by the king. The lords of the marches were mustered there with their bands. Then the king revealed tidings he had just received both from me and from other messengers. They reported that a force of about a hundred orcs, goblins, and dark dwarves was coming to raid the Emerald Glens. The valley real of the Emerald Glens, Tormod, then rose. He spoke in response to tidings of a raiding party of dark dwarves and orcs to the southeast. He declared that the Emerald Glens must be protected, for although the raid was small, many others will follow.” 


Dwain looked up from his axe and gazed at the engraving on the wall depicting an ancient battle. Then he continued, “The council had been called merely to debate the oncoming strife, but now we decided that a force must ride forth. They must be stopped before they reach the Emerald Glens. The king hast ordered a force of four score to be gathered. We march at dawn.” 


Theodreth exclaimed, “The Emerald Glens, where Gill-Aldair traveled.” 
























































Chapter Ⅲ
The Battle at the Fords of Gwal-Wilil








        When morning dawned, there was a great trumpeting in the market square. A thick fog had settled over the moor and showed no sign of lifting. Theodreth, Dwain, and Eòghan had woken early, and they were standing in the courtyard beside the men from the Emerald Glens. They had awoken and broke their fast quickly on the rations, which they had bought the day before, there being no time for a meal. 


The captains of the force, which was being led by lord Dughlas, strode down the line of dwarves. Then the gates opened with a brazen blast of blowing trumpets. 


Theodreth soon found himself marching swiftly out of the gates alongside Dwain and Eòghan. The mist had not lifted, and the moss underfoot was interspersed by great rocks and patches of heather. The silence was oppressive, for no songs rose forth from the band of fighters. 


The eighty or so dwarves who marched forth were comprised mostly of fighters from the Tal-Tormind. The score from the Emerald Glens, the folk of the Dughlas, and the lord Caerlion made up the rest.  The dwarves of the Emerald Glens were clad in tough, worn gear, for they were a hardworking folk who tilled the soil in those fair vales. 


  



As the morning wore on, the mist lightened slightly, allowing them to see a distance on either flank. This only heightened the dread surrounding the band, for they would be constantly straining their eyes to see in the mist. Sometimes, Theodreth thought he saw fleeting shapes in the swirling whiteness until he decided they must be his imagination only. 


They seemed to follow no set path, but the dwarves of the Emerald Glens led the force straight and sure across the moor. Theodred remarked to Eòghan, “I feel as lost as a squirrel on a mountaintop in this fog. All the same, the dwarves of the Emerald Glens seem to find their way steadily.”


Eòghan replied, “They do, but slower than if the mist were lifted. I wish it would clear.”


The mist did not clear, and a dark and foreboding gloom settled in the air. Theodreth’s legs were beginning to ache when he heard a howl in the distance. Lord Dughlas’s voice suddenly boomed out, “Look out, lads, on the right flank.” 




Theodreth, who was marching close to the right flank saw wolflike shapes emerge and fade back into the mist. The dwarven archers standing beside Theodreth prepared notched their arrows to their strings and prepared to fire. After a brief consultation with the lord Dughlas, the chief archer who was one of lord Caerlion’s men, ordered the dwarves to continue marching but with their bows strung and ready. 


Eòghan told Theodreth, “Those grim wolves are not a serious threat to us. They will rarely attack a large band of dwarves, but I fear this portends a larger force nearby.”


“But I thought they were not servants of the dark lord?” Theodreth asked.


Dwain replied, “Those that attacked us at my father’s cottage were not, I deem. Nevertheless, the dark dwarves have tamed some after a fashion and increased their wickedness and size, such as those ridden by the dark dwarves who ambushed us on the journey to the mountain. Moreover, animals that feast on flesh often gather when battle is near.”
“Those are dark words and grim, but there is nothing for it but to march onward. I deem.” So saying, Theodreth turned his eyes ahead once more.


The morning wore on into the afternoon, but no long halt was called; they took food quickly, huddling behind a great rock which thrust itself up from the moss. It was half encircled by a stream. The wolf shapes continued to fade in and out of the mist. Soon, the dwarves marched onward once more. 


“How shall we fare in the darkness of night?” Theodreth asked Dwain who was marching next to him. 


The steadfast dwarf said, “Aye, it twill be a dire night to be sure. I suppose we shall halt for a few hours, but it is nearly night in this mist.” 


“So it is, and I reckon that we shall press onward with all haste, for it is of the utmost import to meet the raiding band soon,” said Eòghan.


Theodreth said, “I feel as if those shapes are approaching.” As he said that, he indicated a group of four wolves that suddenly sprang out of the fog. The three companions had been walking on the edge of the line and recoiled at the onslaught. The first wolf was too quick for Dwain and, with a long, swift leap, knocked him off his feet. 


        The sound of howls and battle broke out simultaneously around the band of dwarves. The archers were soon sending fleet shafts flying into the wolves, who were still surrounding the band. Theodreth heard several yelps of pain as the sure arrows forged in dwarven forges found their mark. The voice of Dughlas boomed above the din, “The wolves are on us, look to your arms.” 


        The wolf on Dwain bit and clawed, trying to find a hold, while Dwain grasped at its throat. Eòghan’s short sword rang as it was whipped from its sheath and thrust at a wolf, which leapt back with a yelp. Theodreth then drew his sword and slashed at another wolf that was dashing at him. The stroke went astray, barely clipping the wolf’s ears, the beast continued its charge forward at Theodreth. In the nick of time, Theodreth leapt aside but stumbled upon a stone and faltered. 


        Dwain, meanwhile, who was striking the wolf on him with his dagger, finally managed to hurl the beast off him with a mighty heave. He leapt up in time to see Theodreth recover his balance. He smote the wolf which was circling him. This time his blow stuck home in the wolf’s shoulder. The beast leapt up into the air with a howl and danced, twisting in agony upon the moor. Theodreth looked in surprise at his sword, on which the blood was still hot. He fancied he caught a faint glow on the blade.


        Eòghan was leaping to and fro, frantically dodging the jaws of two large wolves which were attacking him. He parried and thrust with rapidity, but the wolves swiftly leapt aside with each stroke. Theodreth looked up and, seeing Eòghan’s plight, rushed forward with a sudden onslaught. His charge caught the grim wolf unnawares and smote its shoulder a blow with his sword. It growled and turned toward Theodreth, who leapt aside as it lunged, snapping. When the wolf leapt forward, Theodreth had slashed at it, but his stroke went astray.


        Eòghan slew his wolf with a quick thrust and turned to Theodreth’s. The wolf has gashed Theodreth’s leg with a slashing swipe of its claws. Dwain and Eòghan both rushed toward Theodreth and the wolf but the wolf had already disappeared. Looking around them, the three battle-weary companions saw the wolves fading back into the mist and disappearing over the rock-strewn hills. All about them dwarves were leaning on their weapons and breathing deeply. “Well fought, m’dwarves.” Doughlas’s voice rang out. “After a short rest, we shall press on.” 


        Soon, Theodreth was sitting and wrapping his leg in a cloth from his pack. The wound was not serious for the thickness of his stout garment had turned most of the stroke. Dwain had obtained a few scratches, but he was wearing leather guards that turned most of the wolf’s claws. Eòghan had escaped unwounded but was sorely weary.


        Word spread throughout the force that there was a village nearby at which they were intended to halt. They soon were marching swiftly once more. Theodreth was feeling as if he could not lift his foot once more when they crested a hill, he saw the village. 


It was small and nestled on a hill, which was really an outcropping of the slopes of a small ravine. The village was not very large but had many stone houses sprawling out on little ledges or outcroppings. Some houses were built almost completely into the earthen hill or stone. Their stone fronts only showing. Most houses were partly underground. In the center of the main outcropping was a large hall with the back end leading into the moss-covered cliffside. It was made of a dark wood and grey stone. 


The little band soon were stumbling down a steep path into the village’s heart. They were finally sitting, exhausted, on the flagstones. A walled cliff was visible at one end of the square. Other portions of the edge were lined with houses or workshops. 


Dughlas sent a messenger to the largest of the houses. The house had the ensignia of the village, Deepcleft, above the door. It was a trout emblazoned upon a green field alongside a rock spire. Soon, an older, plumper dwarf came out. He was tall and wore a green cape emblazoned with the village's coat of arms. He conferred with Dughlas for a time.


 Meanwhile, messengers were coming to and fro. One began beating a large gong that sat by the cliff edge. The gong, which was bronze, let forth a resonous booming sound. Before long, many dwarves were thronging in the square. Those who were not were hastening down steep paths and walkways toward the square. 


After talking to the master of the village, Dughlas turned to the little band of dwarves. “We must complete our mission and swiftly counter the oncoming raid. Nevertheless, this mist shall impede us sorely. Thus, I have arranged with the master of this village, Braestor, for our band to stay in the village until the fog lifts.” 


Although welcome news, no cheers greeted this statement. The dwarves began to build a fire a great central fireplace. Some were huddled around this fire, beginning to cook. Others began to try and rest. Theodreth, Eòghan, and Dwain sat near the fire. They listened the dwarves from Caerlion’s folk began to sing. The fire rose and cast shadows about the mist-filled square. The village dwarves listened also as a tale of days gone past was sung. 






His sword’s bitter blade shining bright
His shield of adamant strong 
Teàrlach the warrior with crown of light
Strode over moor with spear long


He came with a striding along 
To forest black with despair
He came with step long 
Under trees with branches bare


Teàrlach in forest dark
Came onto a barrow mound
The stone door bore an ancient mark
A rune of death in script yet unfound


Teàrlach called a mighty call
Come forth o lord of despair
Come and face Teàrlach the tall
Come and leave your dark lair
 
The barrow door was burst 
A darkness sprang up as a flame
A living shadow tall and accursed 
An evil without a name 
A lord of darkness and a king of dread
A servant of the lord of death
With a ghostly crown upon his head
A cold flame of ghostly breath


Teàrlach stood tall and drove his spear
His mighty stroke drove at the ghostly form before him
The spear shattered on the lord of fear
Teàrlach stood with face grim 


He drew his shining sword
Out sprang a white flame
A brightly shining ward
A shield of light forth came


Teàrlach struck a stinging blow 
On the evil wight’s brow, it fell
with a cry that rang in cavern-low 
A cry that echoed over hill and dell
Teàrlach raised his arm to slay
But not yet vanquished was his foe
Teàrlach leaps back in dismay
A spell of dread that none now know


A dark flame of death 
That burned tree and grass 
Like a dragon's evil breath
A night that would never pass


But Teàrlach’s sword was not quenched
He sprang toward the king of night 
And swung his blade in his hand clenched
There was a flash of brilliant light 


As Teàrlach’s stroke cut down the deathly lord
The darkness now held no fear
A shadow passed to linger in some mountain hoard
Teàrlach stooped and gathered his shattered spear


In the barrow deep 
He found a graven horn
This he grasp to keep
Till from his dying hands, it was torn


when it rang in the mountains far
Teàrlach’s foes would tremble and flee
When his horn was heard sounding from afar 
Great battles it heralded with Teàrlach’s banner flowing free




The song ended and the dwarves around the leaping flames fell silent. Theodreth asked “What became of Teàrlach?”


Eòghan replied, “The legends tell us he marched with a great host right up the fell pass. There was a great battle there. He battled the dark lord himself or at least his lieutenant. But he proved a mighty foe. Finally, Teàrlach, lord of the north, fell. It is told that his banner bearer bore his body away. Thus ended the line of the northern kings.” Eòghan added as an afterthought, “Dùghlas is a descendant of Teàrlach’s sister son” 


“Aye, I remember the song being sung many a time by traveling bards when i was young.” Dwain said. 
        


  

 [g]














[a]so this man seems to be very comfortable with a strange man who just landed in the middle of his field, and also seems to be pretty comfortable with the fact the Theodred doesn't know anything about this place - which is perfectly alright if that's what you're going for. But if I were the one who had a mysterious person land in the middle of my yard, I'd probably not really comprehend that he was from a different world and had no idea what was going on. I'd probably have no idea what was going on too
[b]i wrote this when i was ten so i'm still revising and remember this is a mythic world and things that land in your yard are probably due respect thanks though
[c]does that make sense
[d]I need help thinking of more odds and ends.
[e]_Marked as resolved_
[f]_Re-opened_
[g]If you want, I can send an image that's bigger than this.